Unhosted protocol separates software and remote data

Amsterdam/Berlin, Thursday September 8th 2011

NLnet foundation announces today that it will financially support the Unhosted 
project with a grant for a period of one year. Unhosted is a groundbreaking 
community effort to provide a safe way for users to work with web applications,
by allowing the separation of software made available through the internet from
their personal and business data. Unhosted makes it possible to use software
served from the premises of a vendor while allowing the data to remain
elsewhere - even inside the private domain of a person or organisation
Because the application and the data can meet in the browser, there is no reason
to restrict data to where the software originates.

"We think Unhosted provides a novel paradigm for internet applications,", says
Michiel Leenaars, director of Strategy at NLnet foundation, "Just like regular
software doesn't impose on you where data lives, software consumed as a service
should allow you to keep data where you want it too. It actually makes a lot of
sense."

"Computers have a hard disk inside them with all your data under your control.
But more and more applications are hosted online, inviting us to put our data
onto their servers. Apart from our data being locked inside a place we don't
have control over, many websites sell our data to third parties. This is a huge
emergency in terms of consumer rights.", says Unhosted project lead Michiel de
Jong. "As software moves to the cloud, the PC is replaced by shiny devices like
the iPad and Chromebook. The iPad synchronizes with the Apple cloud, and the
Chromebook synchronizes with the Google cloud. But unhosted web apps let the
user decide which cloud provider they prefer. Consumers can already choose
between multiple providers of commodities like electricity, telephony, and
internet connection. Our protocol does the same for your remote storage. To work
on the topic in an open and vendor-neutral way, a Community Group was formed
this week at the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C)."

Unhosted was started exactly one year ago on September 9th 2010 by a group of
volunteers led by Michiel de Jong, a Dutch software developer based in Berlin.
The project provides both a implementation agnostic protocol - building on
existing standards such as WebDAV,OAuth and Webfinger - and an SDK that can
be used by applications for easy integration. In addition to the grant from
NLnet foundation, Unhosted already raised 14.000 through crowdsourced funding.

Acceptance of cloud applications often hinges on the trust that people have in
their vendors, and Unhosted increases the options for people to use remote
applications without fear of their data being used for unintended purposes.
"Unhosted takes the general idea of the cloud one step further by separating
functionality, trust and storage to different places in the cloud," says
Leenaars. "It points us to the challenging idea that maybe the best technology
provider should be just that, and not the keeper of our private and commercial
secrets."


NB: If you want to publish a short exclusive interview about this, please email
interview questions directly to press@unhosted.org
